# Introduction to Collections - Stacks

## Objectives

* Define the concepts and terminology related to collections.

* Explore the basic structure of the Java Collections API.

* Discuss the abstract design of collections.

* Define a stack collection.

* Use a stack collection to solve a problem.

* Examine an array implementation of a stack.

# 3.1 Collections

- Object that gathers and organizes other objects.

- Also designs specific ways objects within the collection (called elements) are accessed and managed. (Ruleset for the specific collection. LIFO/FIFO etc).

- User of the object (another class essentially) must only interact with the collection in the prescribed way.

## Broad categories

Organization of elements in a collection (relative to each other), is usually determined by one of two things

* The order in which they were added to the collection

* Some inherent relationship among the elements themselves (??)

### Linear

- Elements of the collection are organized in a straight line (vertical or horizontal, doesnt matter)

### Non-linear

- Elements of the collection are organized in something other than a straight line. Hierarchy or a network. FWIW, a nonlinear collection may not have any organization at all.

## Figure 3.1

[!02.figure.3.1.collections.png]


A linear collection may always add new elements to one of the ends in the collection (either front or back), which determines the order of which they are added. Another linear collection may be organized in another fashion, for example in alphabetical order.

The specific organization of the elements in a nonlinear collection can also be determined by either of these two ways.

## Abstract Data Types

First we need to define what an abstraction is

* * *

### What is an abstraction

An abstraction hides certain details at certain times. Using abstraction, we hide _di_stractions like having to deal with knowing what every part of the car does, or knowing everything an abstract {java, python, golang} class does.

You dont need to know every method of the Comparable class to use it to compare strings alphabetically. 

Car example from the book:

> For example, we couldn't possibly drive a car if we had to worry about all the details that make the car work: the spark plugs, the pistons, the transmission, and so on. Instead, we can focus on the _interface_ to the car: the steering wheel, the pedals, and a few other controls. These controls are an abstraction, hiding the underlying details and enabling us to control an otherwise very complicated machine.

* * *

## Abstract Data Types

_Now that we've defined what an abstraction is, we can continue with ADT_

A collection (as well as any well designed object) is an abstraction. A collection uses interface operations to let the user manipulate (add, edit, delete) the objects in the collection. The user uses the interface provided, but does not need to understand _how_ the collection works behind the scenes. Its good to know, but its a different issue. (ref. We use collections in OOP before we learn how they work) 

[!figure.3.2.png]

> A well-defined interface masks the implementation of the collection

Abstraction is important in the field of software engineering. Theres no way one person can know every part of a big software system (ref. X.org or NSA programs). Therefore systems are divided into smaller "subsystems". 

Lets use NSA programs as an example. They have software like XKEYSCORE, FASCIA, OPTICNERVE (used with XKEYSCORE), Boundless Informant, DISHFIRE. By splitting each part of their massive surveillance program, they make it easier to maintain the whole system, but also to learn specific parts of a bigger system. You can have one system administrator for XKEYSCORE, one for OPTICNERVE, DISHFIRE etc. For the NSA, the added benefit is that it makes it difficult for anyone in the IC (except Snowden) to discover just how big and intrusive their system is. However in normal businesses its a benefit that you have experts on different things. If you want to be a valuable employee (as in it would cause more harm than good to fire you. Maintain a fair power dynamic, dont be a modern slave.), I suggest becoming an expert into one of their most valuable and least known part of their software systems. 

The information of a well designed object is _encapsulated_ from the rest of the system, meaning that the instance variables are declared as *private*. Meaning that only the object (instance of the class) itself can access its contents, from methods known as getters and setters. 

The book says the following:

### ADT from the book

>As we progress through our exploration of collections, we will always stress the idea of separating the interface from the implementation. Therefore, for every collection that we examine, we should consider the following issues:

* How does the collection operate, conceptually?

* How do we formally define the interface to the collection?

* What kinds of problems does the collection help us solve?

* What support is already available to us for this type of collection?

* In which various ways might we implement the collection?

* What are the benefits and costs of each implementation?

### Lets define some more

#### ADT

> An _abstract data type_ (ADT) is a data type whose values and operations are not inherently defined within a programming language. It is abstract only in that the details of its implementation must be defined and should be hidden from the user. A collection, therefore, is an abstract data type.

#### Data Structure

> A _data structure_ is the collection of programming constructs used to implement a collection. For exmple, a collection might be implemented using a fixed-size structure such as an array. One interesting artifact of these definitions and our design decision to separate the interface from the implementetion (i.e., the collection from the data structure that implements it) is that we may, and often do, end up with a linear data structure, such as an array, being used to implement a nonlinear collection, such as a tree.

#### Why define?

> Historically, the terms _ADT_ and _data structure_ have been used in various ways. We carefully define them here to avoid any confusion, and will use them consistently. Throughout this text, we will examine various data structures and how they can be used to implement various collections.

## The Java Collections API

See book.

Even though Java provides us with an API for almost every collection, we should still learn how to make our own collections or how to implement them in our own fashion. This is because the Java Collections API may not be implemented in a way we want to use it.

See book for further details


