# Recursion

## Goals

* Explain the underlying concepts of recursion.

* Examine recursive methods and unravel their processing steps.

* Define _infinite recursion_ and discuss ways to avoid it.

* Explain when recursion should and should not be used.

* Demonstrate the use of recursion to solve problems.

## What is recursion

Computerphile - Recursion [[Invidious](https://invidio.us/watch?v=Mv9NEXX1VHc)] | [\[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mv9NEXX1VHc)\]

Feels redundant to type this, but it is a programming technique.

Recursion is a method calling itself within the method or before the same method is removed from the call stack. Exactly like ```method a``` could call ```method b```, ```m̀ethod c``` can call ```method c``` (i.e itself). It will at itself onto the [method] call stack, until the exit condition is met. Then it will work its way down the method stack, _finishing_ each of the calls. It can be a bit hard to visualize it in your head, but think of it as the method restarting (more correctly, duplicating with different values) itself when it hits the recursion call, then continuing the rest of the method/function once it stopped recursing. (Watch a video on it)

## Base case

The base case is the case of which the call is not recursive any more (i.e the exit condition). The base case is there to terminate the recursion.

If there is no base case then you stumble upon a problem called _infinite recursion_, which is almost identical to an infinte loop, the only difference being that the "loop" occurs in the definition (defined method) itself. It is therefore critical to make sure to always include a base case.

> Any recursive definition must have a nonrecursive part, called the base case, that permits the recursion to eventually end.


_Defined by John Lewis & Joseph Chase, in Java Software Structures: Designing and Using Data Structures_

## Recursion in math

Factorial (n!) is an example of recursion in math. 

> In mathematics, the factorial of a positive integer n, denoted by n!, is the product of all positive integers less than or equal to n:

```
n! = n * (n - 1) * (n - 2) * (n - 3) ... * 3 * 2 * 1
```


```
5! = 5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * 1 = 120
```

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factorial

## Real life example

* Babushka dolls




## Code example

Python code showing the use of recursion to calculate factorial

```python
def factorial(n):
    # This is the base case of the method
    if n == 0:
        return 1

    # Here the recursion happens
    return (n * factorial(n -= 1))
```

## Fractal examples

Sierpinski triangle

Mandelbrot Set


